---
slug: vipassana
title: Vipassana
authors: [jawad]
tags: [meditation, spirituality, personal-growth, mindfulness]
date: 2024-12-15
---
# Vipassana

Reflections on meditation, inner awareness, and the transformative power of Vipassana practice.

<!--truncate-->

Why should I meditate?

I get this question often. My response: one doesn't need to find
meditation, let it find you when you need it.

If you don't have a problem, why solve it? Besides, meditation is one of
those things that you only realize the benefit of after significant
up-front investment. It's unusual for someone to invest in something
they don't understand the rewards of.

Even once I explain what I got out of meditation, many don't find
meditation appealing. Improve concentration? I don't need that, I have
good focus. I have to stay still in one place for some time? No thanks.
I have to be remain silent? Count me out. I have to pay attention to
"the sensations" that are arising in my body? Get the f*** out.

To be fair, it's very difficult to explain the benefits of meditation,
because I don't have the words to describe it. Our language is based on
the five senses, and meditation is trying to transport us beyond these.
You may have heard this referred to as the "inner world".

I can only speak for my own experiences. After practicing Vipassana for
some time, I've become more attuned to how I'm feeling. I've become more
aware of when I'm "bull-shitting" myself and others, and when I'm
creating drama in my relationships (and why). It's strange; there are
times when I am arguing and I can see myself from above myself and know
that I'm only trying to avoid the pain of being wrong, or looking
stupid, or having to apologize for a mistake I made. I know this sounds
like basic life skills, but before I practiced Vipassana I would've
reacted without this awareness.

I've also become more sensitive to the intentions of others around me. I
find I can be more tactful because I understand how someone else must be
feeling.

I've started paying attention to the causality of things... what led to
this particular event? What triggered it? What were the parameters in
question? The flip side of this is: what will this action lead to? Such
understanding of causality is key for learning from mistakes and making
sound decisions.

I've also realized that once we express something as an action, we are
sowing a trigger for the action to happen again. This works both ways,
whether the action has pleasant or unpleasant consequences. Basically,
our actions are not memoryless systems. What we do sows the seed for what
we are likely to do (and therefore who we are likely to be) in the
future.

There's another aspect of what I've experienced with Vipassana, but I'm
not sure how to explain it (or what to make of those experience). I have
had experiences where I've "dissolved" into everything else. There's
some loss of the notion of "Jawad". I'm aware of "I", but the "I"
becomes less important than the awareness of what's being experienced.

I call these "spiritual" experiences, because "spirituality" implies
beyond the world of senses, and such experiences beckon me to consider
the world beyond the signals (senses) received by the "I".

In truth, I haven't been diligent with practicing Vipassana (a.k.a
Insight Meditation) consistently. And consistency here, as with so many
other aspects of life, is key. While practicing consistently is still a
goal, I find that I'm still able to get into the meditation after being
away from it for some time. It's like muscle memory; the more one has
practiced a physical movement pattern, the more likely they are to be
able to repeat it.

## The Retreat Experience

I learned Vipassana at a silent meditation retreat. For ten days,
participants are asked to take a vow of silence, and to live a life
similar to Buddhist monks, by taking the following "precepts": 1) no
lying, 2) no killing, 3) no sexual activity, 4) no stealing and 5) no
intoxicants. The no talking part takes care of 1. Precept 2 was pretty
easy---except when the mosquitos came along.

The retreat was located an hour north of Toronto, an area called
Innisville. This is a fairly secluded area, far away from Torontonian
hustle and bustle. There's a lot of stillness in this part of nature,
and that stillness tends to instill humans as well. Stillness is good.
The analogy many spiritual masters give is as follows. If one looks into
turbulent water, the depths remain murky. But with stillness one can see
through to the depths. That's why meditation is more than a tool for
concentration. It's a vehicle to help you peer deeply into yourself, see
what you're made of.

In this secluded forest were situated a few wooden structures, some one
storey high and others two-storeyed. The two-storeyed structures were
where the dwelling rooms were, with two people to a room. The structures
for men and women were separated. I wonder where persons of
non-traditional gender identity reside.

The other structures were for the kitchen, and another for the
meditation hall. The meditation hall was a large, open space, sheltered
and usually dark, with a slightly raised platform at the front for
"teachers". The rest of the hall was flat and carpeted (IIRC). We would
use yoga mats and cushions on the floor to meditate. Some people used
chairs.

## Daily Routine

Each day we woke up at 4:30 am to the sound of a tolling bell. We would
head out of our rooms, make our way down to clean up, and then head over
to the meditation hall under the as-yet star-lit sky. Here we would
meditate for an hour and a half before another tolling bell would
announce breakfast was served in the kitchen.

The food (and everything else) was completely free. Participants are
free to make a donation after they leave but it's not necessary. The
food is vegetarian. The authorities insist this is to keep costs low,
but I found this diet to be very energizing compared to my daily meal.
It was very simple food, whole, unprocessed food, and I was surprised by
how easily it passed through my system. Sadly I haven't been able to
stick to that kind of a diet with my family. Something I want to do more
of day-to-day.

It was strange at first to eat and not talk to anyone, let alone make
eye contact. I could see everyone else heading in and out of the
kitchen, and lining up after one another. I could see the volunteer
servers preparing and laying out the food arrangements. But everything
happened without a single word uttered. The silence is deafening at
first but I soon grew accustomed to it. In fact, once the outer world is
silent, the inner world starts to become noticeable. What's noticeable
can be observed, followed, and eventually "engineered" (or
reverse-engineered).

After breakfast, we headed back to the meditation hall for an hour and a
half of guided meditation. The rest of the day was comprised of such
hour-and-a-half chunks of group meditation with a few minutes of break
in between. All said, we meditated for 11 hours a day. It's very
difficult not to notice what's going on within oneself after sitting
still and observing oneself for 11 hours, ten days straight. I noticed
my own agitation start to spring up after day 4.

At 12 we had lunch (of course, announced by the bell that tolls), and at
5pm we had tea. After this, there would be no food until breakfast the
next day. I was concerned at first, but quickly realized that eating
actually makes meditation harder. It's easier to meditate on an empty
stomach. The body just seems to be more readable without the distraction
of food-processing happening within. Again, sadly, I haven't quite been
able to take this back with me into my life. I tend to abuse food and
use it as a reward mechanism. Much left wanting here.

At 8pm there's the final group meditation, which involves a lecture
covering the "theory" behind what was practiced that day. First we
practiced, then we understood the wisdom behind the practice. I liked
it. Having been to engineering school, I wonder whether I'd have learned
better this way.

The lectures were delivered by S. N. Goenka and are available on
[youtube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cz7QHNvNFfA&list=PLPJVlVRVmhc4Z01fD57jbzycm9I6W054x).
I had the option of viewing these before I went to the retreat, but
decided not to. I'm glad with the decision. I think I would've judged
the quality of the video, or misunderstood some of the ideas therein
without having experienced it myself. Needless to say, these lectures
blew my mind. Regardless of whether the ideas were fact or fiction, the
ideas themselves were fascinating.

## The Practice

The meditation itself was divided into two phases. The first phase of
the meditation was a breathing-based exercise called "Ana Pana", which
refers to the breath going in and out of the nostrils. This meditation
was about bringing our attention to the triangle formed from the top of
the nose at its apex, and the upper lip at the base. As the breath
travels in and out, it touches the upper lip. We were asked to pay
attention to the nature of the breath when it enters and leaves. Its
temperature, its feel, its volume, its frequency. The idea here was
to prepare us for body-scanning (the second phase). Since this
triangular area is small, it helps prepare us for eventually
body-scanning the entire body by taking baby steps.

The second phase is Vipassana meditation. What we did with the upper
lip, we would now do with the entire body. Starting with the crown of
the head, we would take each "patch" of our skin and rest our attention
there for a few seconds, noticing what sensations are present.
Itchiness, numbness, large unnoticeable patches, small very noticeable
patches, tickles, hot, cold... whatever was going on, the goal was to
just observe, without judging the sensation.

## The Wisdom Behind the Practice

The underlying wisdom in this practice is that all our actions stem from
sensations. There's a closed feedback loop between our environment and
us, and if we don't pay attention to this loop that we, being creatures
of habit, will habitually react to our environment. Thus our environment
will control us. To break this loop, we prevent the cycle from
completing. The loop looks as follows.

First a trigger occurs in the environment. Our senses pick this up and
send out, hint hint, a sense-ation. Our perceptive centers judge the
sensation as pleasant or unpleasant, based on a few factors, including
past experiences. How we react to a sensation will be recorded in this
perceptive center, which is why our actions are so important. This is
how trauma is stored in the body. Positive learning is also stored in
the body (that's a fire, I mustn't touch it!). The goal is not to
indiscriminately forget all the past. The goal is to not react to the
sensations that are coming up, but to be able to look at them anew and
make the right decisions in the present.

The point at which we can break the feedback loop is when the sensation
is first noticed. If we don't notice it, the perceptive center will
automatically judge it and create a reaction. But if we can sense the
sensation, remain equanimous (neither develop an attachment or an
aversion to it), we start to weaken the judgement, or labelling, around
that sensation. The next time that sensation comes up, we're more likely
to be robust to it, and instead of reacting unconsciously, respond to it
consciously.

This was so long ago, but I still remember being there vividly. I'll try
to do another one of these retreats soon, they really do transform you.
They're not the easiest thing to do, especially when you come out of a
secluded, quiet forest and into a bustling city like Toronto which is
pregnant with sound. It can be a lot. But these excursions made me
realize that there's so much unconsciousness in my life and if I am to
grow beyond my current condition, I must weaken the hold that my
environment has on me.
